0.23 release notes (#36)
pyodide/pyodide-blog: content/posts/0.23-release.md

   access the standard library source code, you need to unpack the zip file.

To some extent, however, these optimizations have been offset by the
growth of the Python standard library, and the enabling additional
functionality over time. 

As can be seen in the following graph, there are size increases for each major
Python version, with an overall, slowly decreasing trend for the download size,

<img src="download_size_evolution.webp" alt="Download size evolution for the Python REPL" />

In this release we have also added a py-compiled build for the Python standard
library and packages. This leads to faster initialization times, however
because the size of .pyc files increased in Python 3.11
([cpython#99554](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/99554)) the overall
download size is larger.

--------------------------------------------
|        | full | py-compiled |
|--------|------|-------------|
| Download size of Python + sdlib (Brotli compressed) |  5.3 MB |      6.9 MB    | 
| Load + initialization time (Firefox) |  1.3 s |      0.87 s    |
| Load + initialization time (Chrome)  |  0.85 s |      0.46 s    |

> Similarly load time improvements x1.2 - x2.0 were observed for larger packages

Author: That was with Python 3.10, it's really unfortunate that Python 3.11 produces so much larger .pyc files. Hopefully, they will fix some of it in 3.12. I need to re-run those benchmarks.

such as pandas, sympy or scikit-learn
([pyodide#3269](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/3269))

You can use to py-compiled builds by either setting,
```
https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/pyodide/v0.23.0/pyc/
```
as the `indexURL` or by appending `?build=pyc` to [the REPL
URL](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/console.html?build=pyc). Pyodide CLI now
also has the command `pyodide py-compile` to py-compile Python wheels to for a
given Python version.

A known limitation of py-compiled builds is that the error traceback no longer
contain code snippets, only the line numbers.

## Javascript API and Foreign Function Interface

> 

Reviewer: There's a fun story about Python multiple inheritance and my `tp_mro` hack here:
https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/blob/main/src/core/jsproxy.c#L3893-L3917
The FFI is getting really polished at this point.

I think we should add better cross-language typing to our roadmap. This is the biggest area of the ffi that still needs work IMO.

Author: @hoodmane I added some things for this section, but not overly inspired. That is an interesting story, but I'm not sure how to integrate it into the release notes )

╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

In this release, `pyodide build-recipes` had many improvements, such as nicer
progress logging with Rich, auto-detection of the number of CPUs for parallel
builds, and the `--no-deps` option to skip dependency resolution.

As to `pyodide build` command for building wheels out-of-tree, it can now
build a list of packages in a `requirements.txt` file via the `-r
<requirements.txt>` parameter. It can also recursively build package
dependencies with the `--build-dependencies` option and allows better build
reproducibility with the `--output-lockfile` parameter.

## Experimental support for SDL2

There has been a long-standing request to add support for graphics applications to Pyodide.
In this release, we have added support for SDL-based packages.
This is still an experimental feature and there are known issues,
but we aim to resolve them in the next release to make it more stable.

If you'd like to try it out, in this release we've added support for pyxel,
the popular Python game library. You can try running a game made with pyxel in Pyodide

> [here](https://ryanking13.github.io/pyodide-pyxel-test/).

Author: Very nice, thanks!

---
title: "Pyodide 0.23.0 release"
date: 2023-03-30
tags: ["release", "announcement"]
author: "TODO"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
---

> Pyodide 0.22 is a major release focused on uppdating CPython version to 3.11, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pyodide 0.23 is a major release focused on updating CPython version to 3.11, and
```
